Gimp-Print 4.3.16, released June 7, 2003, is a development release of
this package.  Like all development releases, this version is
considered unstable and should only be used by those individuals
tolerant of the likelihood of problems.  Individuals desiring a stable
release of Gimp-Print should use the latest 4.2 release.

Gimp-Print is a suite of printer drivers that may be used with most
common UNIX print spooling systems, including CUPS, lpr, LPRng, or
others.  These drivers provide high quality printing for UNIX
(including Macintosh OS X 10.2 and newer) and Linux systems in many
cases equal to or better than proprietary vendor-supplied drivers, and
can be used for many of the most demanding printing tasks.

This software includes the Print plug-in for the Gimp, and Ghostscript
and CUPS drivers, including Foomatic data.

This package requires libxml2 2.5 or above.  You may need to install a
package named "libxml2-devel" or the like on many distributions.

The Print plugin for the Gimp requires the Gimp 1.2 (later versions of
the Gimp are not supported).  You may need to install a package named
"gimp-devel" or the like on many distributions.

The CUPS driver requires CUPS 1.1.15 or higher.  You may need to
install a package named "cups-devel" or the like on many
distributions.

The Foomatic data will work with either Foomatic 2.x or 3.x.  Foomatic
3.x has additional capabilities that this package detects and takes
advantage of.

The IJS-based GhostScript plugin driver requires GNU Ghostscript 6.53
or later, ESP Ghostscript 7.05 or later, or APFL GhostScript 7.04 or
later.  It also requires that glib 1.2 be installed.  You may need to
install a package named "glib-devel" or the like on many distributions.

Users of Macintosh OS X 10.2 and above can use this package, as the
printing system is based on CUPS, which is supported by Gimp-print.
Note that Macintosh OS X 10.0 and 10.1 (including 10.1.5) cannot use
this package.

Please read the README file for full instructions on installing this
package.


Gimp-Print 4.3.16 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.15:

1) There are many quality and functionality improvements for Epson
   Stylus printers.  All users of 4.3 who are using an Epson printer
   (particularly newer models of photo printers) should take this
   release.  Specific quality improvements include:

   * Most photo printers have been retuned for significantly improved
     color quality.  In particular, color casts when printing grays
     are greatly reduced.

   * The Epson Stylus Photo 2200 (using Photo Black ink) now prints
     correct blacks, and with correct density.  The Photo Black ink
     has been tuned with Premium Glossy Photo Paper and Premium
     Semigloss Photo Paper.  We recommend using the default setting
     for Ink Type (which is 7-color photo) at all times.

   * The Epson Stylus Photo 950/960, 2100/2200, PM-950C, and PM-970C
     had a minor color registration bug in 6 and 7 color modes; in
     particular, the light inks were offset by 1/360" from the dark
     inks.  The change is probably unnoticeable in continuous-tone
     images, but may have been visible when printing solid colors with
     sharply-defined edges.

   * Support for Epson Premium Semigloss and Archival Matte papers has
     been added (Archival Matte for the Stylus Photo 2100/2200 and
     Stylus Pro 7600 and 9600 only).

   * Support for Epson UltraChrome Ink with Matte Black has been
     added.  The combination of Matte Black ink and Archival Matte
     paper has been tuned, at least for the Stylus Photo 2200.  We
     recommend using the default setting for Ink Type (which is
     7-color photo) at all times.

   * Internally, there have been many changes to the data organization
     in the driver.

   The Epson Stylus Pro 7600 and 9600 should work well, although this
   is untested and we would appreciate volunteers.  It's likely that
   the dot sizes on these printers are different from the 2200; most
   likely resolutions below the highest resolution will not work
   optimally, although 2880x1440 should use the same drop size on all
   UltraChrome printers.

   We recommend using the Color mode and default setting for Ink Type
   at all times with UltraChrome ink.  These inks appear to have been
   designed to work together as a set, and very strong color shifts
   *will* occur if this is not done.

4) A few compilation problems have been fixed.

5) A new modular interface to the color code has been created.  This
   will permit addition of color management later.

6) The user interface now enables and disables options based on other
   option settings more accurately.


Gimp-Print 4.3.15 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.14:

1) The code for handling ink shades and drop sizes has been
   extensively overhauled; results should be much more consistent.  In
   particular, the same balance between ink shades is now used at all
   resolutions for a given printer, and the driver always tries to use
   the smallest ink drop size it usefully can.  The result is that
   colors should be much more uniform across different resolutions
   with the same printer (particularly with variable drop size
   printers), and output should be smoother.  It is likely (although
   this has not been verified) that printing is faster, too.

   There may still be some issues; please report any problems.

   Internally, this is implemented by means of a new "channel"
   architecture, which is responsible for conversions of this type.

2) A long-standing build problem whereby the package will not build on
   systems that already have Gimp-Print 4.2 or earlier versions of
   Gimp-Print 4.3 installed has been fixed.

3) The existing Line Art image optimization has been renamed to
   Uncorrected, which is a better description of its effect.  There is
   a new Threshold mode, which simply computes a threshold value
   (either on or off for each color).

4) The default image optimization mode is now Photographs (which has
   the best color correction) rather than the old Line Art (which as
   noted above is now called Uncorrected).

5) An experimental driver for the Olympus P-300 has been added.  This
   driver has significant limitations; the size of an image much
   closely match the size of a print from this printer.

6) The Fast and Very Fast dither algorithms are significantly
   different from before.  The Fast dither algorithm now uses the same
   dither pattern previously used by the Very Fast algorithm, and the
   Very Fast algorithm only uses the largest drop size.  The Ordered
   algorithm should now run as fast as the Fast algorithm did before.

7) This package now uses gettext 0.11 internally.


Gimp-Print 4.3.14 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.13:

1) Problems with the Epson driver printing too much ink at high
   resolutions on all printers have been fixed, and a related crash on
   the Stylus Photo 950/960 and 2100/2200 has been fixed.  This
   problem was introduced in 4.3.13.

2) Ink drop auto-resizing in the Epson driver has been fixed, and an
   option to turn it off has been added.  Auto-resizing is a feature
   by which if the density is increased to the point where every dot
   position is filled, a larger dot size is chosen to allow more ink
   to be printed.  This permits users to solve problems of not enough
   ink being printed.

3) A glitch in Even Tone dithering in certain very pale regions has
   been fixed.  This problem was introduced in 4.3.12.

4) Significant improvements in the quality of Adaptive Hybrid,
   Ordered, and Fast dithering.

5) The PCL, Canon, and Lexmark drivers now print correctly in
   three-color mode.

6) The Postscript driver in the GIMP plug-in now works correctly in
   non-US locales.

7) A Czech translation has been added.

8) The tests have been improved in coverage and capability.

9) Engineering C paper size has been added.

10) Additional printers have been added to the compatibility list.

11) "Set defaults" in the output adjustment window now sets default
   values of all options (boolean and choice in addition to floating
   point).

12) A problem with ordered and adaptive hybrid dithering at low
   densities has been fixed.  The typical symptom is sharp transitions
   at high resolutions.

13) 1440x1440 Highest Quality has been removed from the resolution
   choice for Epson printers capable of printing at 2880x1440.

14) The Epson family driver has been significantly restructured.

15) Additional "const" corrections have been made in the code.
    Additional (probably too many) warnings have been enabled in
    maintainer mode.

16) The printdef program, which has long been obsolete, has been
   removed.  This has caused some spurious build problems.


Gimp-Print 4.3.13 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.12:

1) Preliminary support for the Epson CL-760, PM-740C, PM-870C,
   PM-930C, PM-970C, and PM-3700C.  These are Japanese-market
   printers.  The PM-970C is an extremely fast 7 color, 2880x2880, 1.8
   picolitre drop size printer; the PM-930C is a 6 color, 2880x2880,
   1.8 picolitre printer.  The PM-970C has been tested but not fully
   tuned; the PM-930C is untested.  The other printers are likely to
   be equivalent to existing tested printers.

2) The number of resolutions offered for most Epson printers has been
   reduced substantially, simplifying the interface.  Unidirectional
   vs. bidirectional print head motion is now a separate option; there
   is now an automatic setting which will pick the direction based on
   the resolution chosen.  We recommend using this default setting.

3) There is now an automatic setting for the ink type for Epson
   printers, which will use the optimal number of colors for the
   choice of printer, paper, and resolution.  This is the default
   setting; most users will not need to override it.

4) The representation of curves has been changed incompatibly; it is
   now an XML representation.  This will cause all curve settings to
   be lost in the GIMP plugin.

5) The margins of the HP DeskJet have been adjusted slightly.

6) The Foomatic interface now uses the new (readable) database names.

7) There have been a number of internal changes; please see the change
   log for details.


Gimp-Print 4.3.12 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.11:

1) It is now possible to use all supported floating point and string
   options with the CUPS driver.  At present, the CUPS driver supports
   all options other than curves.

2) The ink type setting is now optional for the Epson driver.  If the
   default setting is chosen in the CUPS driver, or the check box for
   this is left unchecked in the GIMP plugin, an appropriate ink type
   will be selected for the paper and printer chosen.

3) Full bleed is now offered as an option on Epson printers that
   support it.  The full bleed now correctly overprints the edge of
   the paper.

4) The contrast adjustment now has an option to use either linear
   contrast adjustment (which is what Gimp-print has traditionally
   used) or fixed endpoint (which is what most applications use).

5) All printers will now work correctly with EvenTone dithering.

6) Problems with the Epson Stylus Photo 2100/2200 and Epson Stylus Pro
   10000 have been fixed.


Gimp-Print 4.3.11 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.10:

1) A significant bug fix in the EvenTone dither algorithm
   significantly improves quality with this option.

2) Paper sizes with tearoff margins (such as Epson 4x6 photo paper)
   now use the correct margin.  This corresponds to bug 409612.

3) The IJS driver can now (in principle) handle all options supported
   by Gimp-print, rather than a specific subset.  This is not tested
   and not propagated to Foomatic at this time.  The src/ghost/README
   file has not been updated at this time; finding all of the
   available options will require studying the source code.

4) The number of resolution/quality settings in the Epson driver has
   been reduced by means of adding a new option for unidirectional,
   bidirectional, or auto printing.  This new option is not available
   in the CUPS driver; automatic choice of print head direction is
   always used at this time.

5) The number of paper size choices in the GIMP plugin has been
   greatly reduced; there is a new global option to show all available
   paper sizes or just the most common sizes.

6) The LaserJet IIP driver now supports TIFF compression for faster
   printing speed.


Gimp-Print 4.3.10 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.8:

1) The Print plugin now offers a variety of additional controls in the
   Print Color Adjust window.  We suggest that you experiment with
   these controls; we'd like to know what results you get and any
   suggestions you may have.

2) The exact controls that are available change dynamically depending
   upon selected options; for example, when you select grayscale
   output, the color controls go away.  Some controls are optional;
   you must click a checkbox next to the control in order to enable
   it.

3) There are new controls adjacent to the color swatch in the Print
   Color Adjust window that enable you to view the channels
   individually.

4) The Print plugin windows can be usefully resized.

5) The Print plugin has a new printrc file format.  This format is not
   back compatible with older versions of the plugin; the current
   plugin can read old printrc files, but the saved format will not be
   understood by older versions of the plugin.

6) The maximum density setting has been increased to 8.0 from 2.0.
   The density range of 0.1-2.0 did not allow use of sufficient ink
   for some combinations of paper, ink, and resolution.

7) The Epson driver will automatically attempt to use a larger ink
   drop size if the density is set high enough such that it is not
   possible to deposit enough ink with the current setting.


Gimp-Print 4.3.9 was abandoned.


Gimp-Print 4.3.8 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.7:

1) Gimp-print now loads printer family drivers as modules, rather than
   building them in monolithically.  The net effect is that if you do
   not wish to run make install (i. e. you want to run programs out of
   the build tree), you must set the STP_MODULE_PATH environment
   variable to the directory (or search path) containing the loadable
   modules.  This is usually .../src/main or ...src/main/.libs.

   Other key components (color and dither algorithms) will be
   similarly modularized in the future.  This is an intermediate
   step.

2) Gimp-print now loads printer and paper size definitions, and dither
   matrices, from XML data files.  The net effect is that if you do
   not wish to run make install (i. e. you want to run programs out of
   the build tree), you must set the STP_DATA_PATH environmet variable
   to the directory (or search path) containing the XML files and
   dither matrices (.mat files).  This is usually .../src/main.

   Removing the dither matrices from the source code has resulted in a
   significant reduction in shared object size.

   Other key components and individual modules will define XML schemas
   in the future.

3) The color module now offers many new parameters for color
   adjustment, a few of which are reflected in the GUI (Gimp plugin).
   These parameters include density adjustments in addition to gamma
   adjustments for each channel, curves for each channel, GCR bounds
   and curves, and more.  Taking advantage of this currently requires
   programming skill; we *strongly* urge anyone interested in color
   management with a modicum of programming skill to take a look at
   this.

4) Each different processing module (color, dither, and printer) now
   offers its own parameters.

5) The stp_list_t type is no longer exported in gimp-print.h.  It is
   used internally in various ways; some of those (such as parameter
   lists) are exported.  However, the base type is considered an
   internal utility.

6) All internal symbols (not exported in gimp-print.h) that are
   exported for use within the core library are now prefixed with
   "stpi_" rather than "stp_".

7) CMYK generation from CMY (gray component reduction) is now handled
   within the color code rather than within the dither code.  In the
   future, we expect to move subchannel generation (photo and quadtone
   inksets, for example) into the color code, at least as an option.
   This will enable the dither code to make more intelligent choices
   about dot size selection, and simplify matters for people who want
   to experiment with their own inksets and transfer functions.

8) Density is now processed within the dither algorithms, rather than
   within the color code.  This simplifies color generation somewhat,
   and more accurately reflects the fact that density is a property of
   the resolution and paper type.

9) The dither code in general has been significantly reorganized; each
   algorithm has been split out into a file of its own.  This is a
   possible first step toward modularization of the dither code.

10) As a result of a number of the internal changes, the print quality
   has overall regressed slightly and performance has probably
   regressed significantly.  This is temporary; it is a result of
   getting things working in the environment of rapid change, and
   tuning wil occur later.

11) Valgrind has been used to detect some memory leaks and other
   errors.

12) There have been numerous other API changes.


Gimp-Print 4.3.7 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.6:

1) Further internal API changes.  Please see
   include/gimp-print/gimp-print.h, and the various header files in
   src/main, for details.  There will be significant further changes,
   particularly in the color code.  The API is considerably more
   consistent than before.

2) Parameters are now stored as variables within stp_vars_t, rather
   than as fixed fields.  This change is largely transparent at the
   API level, but it marks an important advance.

3) The Gimp Print plugin has been split into a GTK-based library
   (libgimpprintui) and the actual Print plugin.  The libgimpprintui
   code permits creating print panels for other applications, or
   standalone graphical print utilities, all using the same user
   interface.

   In addition, the thumbnail preview mechanism has been changed to
   use the stp_image_t API rather than to make direct calls to the
   color machinery.  This was done by creating a new family driver
   (print-raw.c) and by creating a new stp_image_t implementation for
   thumbnail creation.  This removed the only reason to export the
   color API, and will permit us to simplify the very complex color
   API.  This work is currently in progress.

   To simplify coding while avoiding an unnecessary dependency, some
   widgets have been borrowed from libgimp.

   The two files comprising the Gimp plugin proper total less than 900
   lines of code, out of about 60,000 lines total in the core library,
   UI library, and Print plugin.

   This work is not complete; support for multiple pages still needs
   to be added, for example.  However, there should be a sufficient
   base to permit interested developers to experiment.

   A very desirable project that someone may wish to undertake is to
   write a ghostscript front end (or extension to ghostview or gv)
   that uses this UI library.  This would create a full-featured
   graphical printing application.

4) Many parameters for Epson printer control, dither matrix control,
   and HSL adjustment have been exported as settable parameters.
   While currently no Gimp-print applications provide access to these
   controls, they are available for developer use.  Please read the
   code to see where they are made available.  This is a work in
   progress; expect major changes in the future.

5) A new header file, gimp-print-version.h, has been created to store
   the autogen-time versioning information.

6) The Gimp Print plugin now uses g_message to deliver error messages
   to pop-ups rather than to stderr.


Gimp-Print 4.3.6 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.5:

1) The old-style Ghostscript driver (the "stp" driver) has been
   removed.  The only supported Ghostscript driver is now the IJS
   driver.  Therefore, Gimp-Print support for Ghostscript now requires
   GNU Ghostscript 6.53 or later, ESP Ghostscript 7.05 or later, or
   APFL GhostScript 7.04 or later.

2) There have been significant API changes, such that the development
   mainline is no longer compatible with the 4.2 stable line.  Please
   see include/gimp-print/gimp-print.h for more information.

   These changes are the first stage of significant new development.

3) The printer definitions have been converted to true XML, and a DTD
   and schema have been added to validate these.

4) Paper sizes have been converted to XML.

5) The Print plugin now displays the preview in portrait mode at all
   times; the image thumbnail is rotated.  Previously, the image
   thumbnail was always displayed with correct orientation and the
   boundaries of the page were rotated.  This behavior was often
   deemed confusing; the new behavior has been requested by many
   people.

6) The Print plugin's redisplay is smoother in many cases when
   resizing the image.

7) The man page for ijsgimpprint(1) has been split into multiple
   pages.

8) The CUPS driver and Foomatic data now support custom page sizes.

9) The Print plugin now allows points, mm, and picas (1/12") as units
   choices, in addition to inches and cm.

10) The unprint test program now allows "unprinting" individual color
   channels selectively.

11) All accumulated bug fixes and improvements in Gimp-Print up to
   4.2.5-pre2 have been applied.


Gimp-Print 4.3.5 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.4:

1) The Epson Stylus 950, 960, 2100, and 2200 have been better tuned.

2) A problem with the Postscript code generated by the Print plugin
   has been fixed.

3) The Japan-market Epson PM-950C should handle the dark yellow ink
   correctly, although it is not tuned.

4) The Epson Stylus Color 600, 800, 850, 1520, and 3000
   now print correctly at 1440x720 DPI.

5) On all printers requiring a right margin greater than zero (which
   is most printers), the native CUPS driver printed a right margin
   twice as wide as the margin required by the printer.  This resulted
   in the output being squeezed slightly.

6) When using the Postscript PS2 output in the GIMP Print plugin to
   print to a CUPS-hosted printer, options selected in the PPD file
   were ignored.

7) On certain systems, the GIMP Print plugin did not save the printer
   defaults correctly.  This happened on systems where the `lpstat -p
   -d' command (used to retrieve the list of printers available on the
   system) produces more than one line listing each printer.

8) The Epson Stylus Pro 7600 and 9600 should now print correctly.

9) The Epson Stylus Photo EX3 is now supported correctly.

10) Various Japan-market Epson printers are now supported.

11) A new utility has been added to the CUPS driver package to
   generate individual PPD files rather than the entire set.

   cups-genppd is a tool for creating gimp-print PPD files for use
   with CUPS.  It allows printers to be specified using the short
   driver name, or their full English names.

   cups-genppdconfig is a user-friendly alternative to cups-genppd.
   It lets a user choose the printers and languages they want to use
   interactively, using menus.  It can also be invoked as
   "update-cups-genppd", which will automatically update any existing
   PPD files.  This may be used to upgrade PPD files from one version
   of gimp-print to another.


Gimp-Print 4.3.4 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.3:

1) A new raw output mode is provided.  This permits the driver to pass
   the color information through unchanged.  Each channel is dithered
   individually (including the photo channels on 6 and 7 color
   printers).  Currently, this is only supported on Epson Stylus
   printers.

   This is currently only accessible via the testpattern generator.
   This could be used in conjunction with external color generation
   as part of a fully color managed workflow.

2) Improvements for various Epson Stylus printers, and support for
   some new printers, as detailed in src/ghost/README.

3) Assorted bug fixes merged from the 4.2 branch.


Gimp-Print 4.3.3 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.2:

1) Printing at very low vertical resolution (typically less than 360
   DPI; 360 DPI itself is fine) in black and white mode on some Epson
   printers either failed or produced incorrect results.  This bug has
   been present for a while.

2) Quad tone grayscale inks, such as the Piezography (TM) inks, are
   now supported for most Epson Stylus printers.  This is not tuned
   for a particular inkset at this time, so the results will not be of
   top quality yet.

3) The Gimp Print plugin will now compile properly on commercial UNIX
   systems that do not have the asprintf function (which is
   libc-specific).

4) Various improvements to EvenTone dithering.

5) The Epson Stylus Photo 2100 and 2200, and 7600 and 9600, should now
   print correctly in seven color mode (for UltraChrome inks).


Gimp-Print 4.3.2 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.1:

1) A failure in the CUPS installation has been fixed.

2) The Even Tone dither algorithm now produces correct colors in CMYK
   mode.


Gimp-Print 4.3.1 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.3.0:

1) A crash that happened in stp_vasprintf on many systems has been
   fixed.

2) A crash in the IJS driver when printing extremely large images,
   such as banners on a wide format printer at high resolution, has
   been fixed.

3) A portability issue in gimpprint-config has been fixed.

4) An installation problem with the CUPS PPD files on systems lacking
   an appropriate install script has been fixed.

5) Partial translations for German, Spanish, and Portuguese have been
   added.

6) The option to *not* build the Gimp-Print library (libgimpprint) has
   been removed.

7) The escputil alignment command has been improved.

8) Preliminary support for the Epson Stylus Photo 950 and 2100/2200,
   and the Stylus Pro 7600 and 9600.  The Stylus Photo 950 has been
   verified and partially tuned.  The other printers are untested and
   may or may work.

9) Quality improvements to the Even Tone dither algorithm.

10) The printer data in the Epson driver has been substantially
   reorganized.  This allows the driver to support the new UltraChrome
   inks (for the Stylus Photo 2100/2200 and Stylus Pro 7600 and 9600).
   This will also permit the driver to support quadtone or hextone
   grayscale inks, although that capability is not enabled at present.

11) The testpattern generator has some improvements, including the
   ability to print 16-bit images.  The image format is not
   documented, as this is likely to change, but people may wish to
   study the code and experiment with it.


Gimp-Print 4.3.0 contains the following major changes over Gimp-Print
4.2.1:

1) A new dithering algorithm, EvenTone, is supported.  EvenTone
   screening was invented by Raph Levien, and produces noticeably
   superior results particularly for continuous tone images such as
   photographs.  EvenTone dithering produces a slight "waterfall"
   effect which may render it unsuitable for line art and graphics
   using extremely pale tones on some printers.

2) Significant reorganization of the internal interfaces between the
   family drivers, the dither code, and the weave code, to enable an
   arbitrary number of subchannels (rather than just 2 each of CMY and
   1 K).

3) Reorganization of the build system to use automake 1.6 and autoconf
   2.52.


Supported Printers:

Many variations on these printers are also supported.  Generally, the
Epson printers are fully supported, although not fully tuned in all
cases; the Canon, HP, and Lexmark printers vary.

Please see the printer-specific notes section following the list of
printers for any instructions specific to your printer.

PostScript level 1        (GIMP Plugin only)
PostScript level 2        (GIMP Plugin only)
Apple Color StyleWriter 4100   (same as HP DeskJet 660C)
Apple Color StyleWriter 4500   (same as HP DeskJet 690C)
Apple Color StyleWriter 6500   (same as HP Deskjet 850C)
CANON BJC 30
CANON BJC 50
CANON BJC 55
CANON BJC 80
CANON BJC 85
CANON BJC 210
CANON BJC 240
CANON BJC 250
CANON BJC 1000
CANON BJC 2000
CANON BJC 3000
CANON BJC 4300
CANON BJC 4400 photo
CANON BJC 6000
CANON BJC 6100
CANON BJC 7000
CANON BJC 7100
CANON BJC 8200
CANON S400
CANON S450
CANON S800
CANON S4500
EPSON Stylus C20SX
EPSON Stylus C20UX
EPSON Stylus C40SX
EPSON Stylus C40UX
EPSON Stylus C41SX
EPSON Stylus C41UX
EPSON Stylus C42SX
EPSON Stylus C42UX
EPSON Stylus C50
EPSON Stylus C60
EPSON Stylus C61
EPSON Stylus C62
EPSON Stylus C70
EPSON Stylus C80
EPSON Stylus C82
EPSON Stylus Color
EPSON Stylus Color Pro
EPSON Stylus Color Pro XL
EPSON Stylus Color 400
EPSON Stylus Color 440
EPSON Stylus Color 460
EPSON Stylus Color 480
EPSON Stylus Color 500
EPSON Stylus Color 580
EPSON Stylus Color 600
EPSON Stylus Color 640
EPSON Stylus Color 660
EPSON Stylus Color 670
EPSON Stylus Color 680/777
EPSON Stylus Color 740
EPSON Stylus Color 760
EPSON Stylus Color 800
EPSON Stylus Color 850
EPSON Stylus Color 860
EPSON Stylus Color 880
EPSON Stylus Color 83
EPSON Stylus Color 900
EPSON Stylus Color 980
EPSON Stylus Color 1160
EPSON Stylus Color 1500
EPSON Stylus Color 1520
EPSON Stylus Color 3000
EPSON Stylus Photo
EPSON Stylus Photo 700
EPSON Stylus Photo EX
EPSON Stylus Photo EX3
EPSON Stylus Photo 720
EPSON Stylus Photo 750
EPSON Stylus Photo 780/785/790
EPSON Stylus Photo 810/820
EPSON Stylus Photo 825/830
EPSON Stylus Photo 870/875
EPSON Stylus Photo 890/895
EPSON Stylus Photo 900
EPSON Stylus Photo 915
EPSON Stylus Photo 925
EPSON Stylus Photo 950
EPSON Stylus Photo 960
EPSON Stylus Photo 1200
EPSON Stylus Photo 1270
EPSON Stylus Photo 1280/1290
EPSON Stylus Photo 2000P
EPSON Stylus Photo 2100
EPSON Stylus Photo 2200
EPSON Stylus Pro 5000
EPSON Stylus Pro 5500
EPSON Stylus Pro 7000
EPSON Stylus Pro 7500
EPSON Stylus Pro 7600
EPSON Stylus Pro 9000
EPSON Stylus Pro 9500
EPSON Stylus Pro 9600
EPSON Stylus Pro 10000
EPSON Stylus Scan 2000
EPSON Stylus Scan 2500
EPSON Stylus CX-3200
EPSON Stylus CX-5200
EPSON CL-700
EPSON CL-750
EPSON CL-760	(Experimental)
EPSON EM-900C
EPSON EM-930C
EPSON MC-2000
EPSON MC-5000
EPSON MC-7000
EPSON MC-9000
EPSON MC-10000
EPSON MJ-930C
EPSON MJ-5100C
EPSON MJ-6000C
EPSON MJ-8000C
EPSON PM-700C
EPSON PM-730C
EPSON PM-740C	(Experimental)
EPSON PM-750C
EPSON PM-760C
EPSON PM-770C
EPSON PM-780C
EPSON PM-790PT
EPSON PM-800C
EPSON PM-850PT
EPSON PM-870C	(Experimental)
EPSON PM-880C
EPSON PM-930C	(Experimental)
EPSON PM-950C
EPSON PM-970C	(Experimental)
EPSON PM-2000C
EPSON PM-2200C
EPSON PM-3000C
EPSON PM-3300C
EPSON PM-3500C
EPSON PM-3700C	(Experimental)
EPSON PM-4000PX
EPSON PM-5000C
EPSON PM-7000C
EPSON PM-9000C
EPSON PM-10000
EPSON PX-7000
EPSON PX-9000
HP DeskJet 340
HP DeskJet 400
HP DeskJet 500
HP DeskJet 500C
HP DeskJet 520
HP DeskJet 540C
HP DeskJet 550C
HP DeskJet 560C
HP DeskJet 600/600C (Single Cartridge)
HP DeskJet 600 series (2 Cartridge)
HP DeskJet 690 series (Photo-Ink capable)
HP DesignJet 230
HP DesignJet 250
HP DesignJet 430
HP DesignJet 450
HP DesignJet 455
HP DesignJet 488
HP DesignJet 700
HP DesignJet 750
HP DesignJet 2500
HP DesignJet 3500
HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 812C
HP DeskJet 840C
HP DeskJet 842C
HP DeskJet 845C
HP DeskJet 850C
HP DeskJet 855C
HP DeskJet 870C
HP DeskJet 890C
HP DeskJet 895C
HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart P1000
HP DeskJet 1100C
HP PhotoSmart P1100
HP DeskJet 1120C
HP DeskJet 1200C
HP DeskJet 1220C
HP DeskJet 1600C
HP DeskJet 2000 series
HP DeskJet 2500 series
HP LaserJet II series
HP LaserJet III series
HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4V, 4Si
HP LaserJet 5 series
HP LaserJet 5Si
HP LaserJet 6 series
Lexmark 4076
Lexmark Z42
Lexmark Z43
Lexmark Z52
Lexmark Z53
Olympus P-300 series (Experimental)

The following is the complete list of printers believed to be
compatible with Gimp-print, along with recommended drivers.  Some of
these printers may work only partially; the specified drivers may not
support the full range of resolutions, paper sizes, media sources,
etc. that some of these printers may offer.

Printer Name                   Driver Name     Driver Description
------- ----                   ------ ----     ------ -----------
Apollo P-2100                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2150                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2200                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2250                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2500                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2550                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2600                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apollo P-2650                  pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
Apple Color StyleWriter 4100   pcl-apple-4100  HP LaserJet II series
Apple Color StyleWriter 4500   pcl-apple-4500  HP LaserJet II series
Apple Color StyleWriter 6500   pcl-apple-6500  HP LaserJet II series
Apple LaserWriter Select 360   pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother DCP-1200               pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother HL-4Ve                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother HL-10h                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-10V                 pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Brother HL-630                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother HL-660                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-760                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-960                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1040                pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother HL-1050                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1060                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1070                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1240                pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother HL-1250                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1260                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1270N               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-1660e               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother HL-2060                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Brother MFC-6550MC             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother MFC-8300               pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Brother MFC-9500               pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Brother MFC-9600               pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Canon BJ-30                    bjc-30          CANON BJC 30
Canon BJC-50                   bjc-50          CANON BJC 50
Canon BJC-55                   bjc-55          CANON BJC 55
Canon BJC-80                   bjc-80          CANON BJC 80
Canon BJC-85                   bjc-85          CANON BJC 85
Canon BJC-210                  bjc-210         CANON BJC 210
Canon BJC-240                  bjc-240         CANON BJC 240
Canon BJC-250                  bjc-250         CANON BJC 250
Canon BJC-1000                 bjc-1000        CANON BJC 1000
Canon BJC-2000                 bjc-2000        CANON BJC 2000
Canon BJC-2010                 bjc-2000        CANON BJC 2000
Canon BJC-2100                 bjc-4300        CANON BJC 4300
Canon BJC-2110                 bjc-2000        CANON BJC 2000
Canon BJC-3000                 bjc-3000        CANON BJC 3000
Canon BJC-4000                 bjc-4300        CANON BJC 4300
Canon BJC-4300                 bjc-4300        CANON BJC 4300
Canon BJC-4400                 bjc-4400        CANON BJC 4400 photo
Canon BJC-6000                 bjc-6000        CANON BJC 6000
Canon BJC-6100                 bjc-6100        CANON BJC 6100
Canon BJC-6200                 bjc-6200        CANON BJC 6200
Canon BJC-6500                 bjc-6500        CANON BJC 6500
Canon BJC-7000                 bjc-7000        CANON BJC 7000
Canon BJC-7100                 bjc-7100        CANON BJC 7100
Canon BJC-8200                 bjc-8200        CANON BJC 8200
Canon GP 335                   pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Canon LBP-4sx                  pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Canon LBP-430                  pcl-4l          HP LaserJet 4L
Canon LBP-1000                 pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Canon LBP-1260                 pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Canon LBP-1760                 pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Canon S100                     bjc-4300        CANON BJC 4300
Canon S300                     bjc-s800        CANON S800
Canon S400                     bjc-s400        CANON S400
Canon S450                     bjc-s450        CANON S450
Canon S500                     bjc-8200        CANON BJC 8200
Canon S600                     bjc-8200        CANON BJC 8200
Canon S630                     bjc-8200        CANON BJC 8200
Canon S800                     bjc-s800        CANON S800
Canon S4500                    bjc-s4500       CANON S4500
Canon imageRunner 330s         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Citizen ProJet II              pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
DEC 1800                       pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
DEC LN17                       pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson ActionLaser 1100         pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Epson ActionLaser II           pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Epson AcuLaser C2000           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson AcuLaser C2000PS         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson AcuLaser C8500           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson AcuLaser C8500PS         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson AcuLaser C8600           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson AcuLaser C8600PS         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5200                 pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Epson EPL-5200+                pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Epson EPL-5700                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5700PS               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5800                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5800PS               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5900                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-5900PS               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-6100                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-6100PS               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Epson EPL-7100                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Epson Stylus C20SX             escp2-c20sx     EPSON Stylus C20SX
Epson Stylus C20UX             escp2-c20ux     EPSON Stylus C20UX
Epson Stylus C40SX             escp2-c40sx     EPSON Stylus C40SX
Epson Stylus C40UX             escp2-c40ux     EPSON Stylus C40UX
Epson Stylus C41SX             escp2-c41sx     EPSON Stylus C41SX
Epson Stylus C41UX             escp2-c41ux     EPSON Stylus C41UX
Epson Stylus C42SX             escp2-c42sx     EPSON Stylus C42SX
Epson Stylus C42UX             escp2-c42ux     EPSON Stylus C42UX
Epson Stylus C50               escp2-c50       EPSON Stylus C50
Epson Stylus C60               escp2-c60       EPSON Stylus C60
Epson Stylus C61               escp2-c61       EPSON Stylus C61
Epson Stylus C62               escp2-c62       EPSON Stylus C62
Epson Stylus C70               escp2-c70       EPSON Stylus C70
Epson Stylus C80               escp2-c80       EPSON Stylus C80
Epson Stylus C82               escp2-c82       EPSON Stylus C82
Epson Stylus Color             escp2           EPSON Stylus Color
Epson Stylus Color I           escp2           EPSON Stylus Color
Epson Stylus Color II          escp2           EPSON Stylus Color
Epson Stylus Color IIs         escp2           EPSON Stylus Color
Epson Stylus Color PRO         escp2-pro       EPSON Stylus Color Pro
Epson Stylus Color 400         escp2-400       EPSON Stylus Color 400
Epson Stylus Color 440         escp2-440       EPSON Stylus Color 440
Epson Stylus Color 460         escp2-460       EPSON Stylus Color 460
Epson Stylus Color 480         escp2-480       EPSON Stylus Color 480
Epson Stylus Color 500         escp2-500       EPSON Stylus Color 500
Epson Stylus Color 580         escp2-580       EPSON Stylus Color 580
Epson Stylus Color 600         escp2-600       EPSON Stylus Color 600
Epson Stylus Color 640         escp2-640       EPSON Stylus Color 640
Epson Stylus Color 660         escp2-660       EPSON Stylus Color 660
Epson Stylus Color 670         escp2-670       EPSON Stylus Color 670
Epson Stylus Color 680         escp2-680       EPSON Stylus Color 680
Epson Stylus Color 740         escp2-740       EPSON Stylus Color 740
Epson Stylus Color 760         escp2-760       EPSON Stylus Color 760
Epson Stylus Color 777         escp2-777       EPSON Stylus Color 777
Epson Stylus Color 8 3         escp2-83        EPSON Stylus Color 83
Epson Stylus Color 800         escp2-800       EPSON Stylus Color 800
Epson Stylus Color 850         escp2-850       EPSON Stylus Color 850
Epson Stylus Color 860         escp2-860       EPSON Stylus Color 860
Epson Stylus Color 880         escp2-880       EPSON Stylus Color 880
Epson Stylus Color 900         escp2-900       EPSON Stylus Color 900
Epson Stylus Color 980         escp2-980       EPSON Stylus Color 980
Epson Stylus Color 1160        escp2-1160      EPSON Stylus Color 1160
Epson Stylus Color 1500        escp2-1500      EPSON Stylus Color 1500
Epson Stylus Color 1520        escp2-1520      EPSON Stylus Color 1520
Epson Stylus Color 3000        escp2-3000      EPSON Stylus Color 3000
Epson Stylus Photo             escp2-photo     EPSON Stylus Photo
Epson Stylus Photo 700         escp2-700       EPSON Stylus Photo 700
Epson Stylus Photo 720         escp2-720       EPSON Stylus Photo 720
Epson Stylus Photo 750         escp2-750       EPSON Stylus Photo 750
Epson Stylus Photo 780         escp2-780       EPSON Stylus Photo 780
Epson Stylus Photo 785         escp2-785       EPSON Stylus Photo 785EPX
Epson Stylus Photo 790         escp2-790       EPSON Stylus Photo 790
Epson Stylus Photo 810         escp2-810       EPSON Stylus Photo 810
Epson Stylus Photo 820         escp2-820       EPSON Stylus Photo 820
Epson Stylus Photo 825         escp2-825       EPSON Stylus Photo 825
Epson Stylus Photo 830         escp2-830       EPSON Stylus Photo 830
Epson Stylus Photo 870         escp2-870       EPSON Stylus Photo 870
Epson Stylus Photo 875         escp2-875       EPSON Stylus Photo 875
Epson Stylus Photo 890         escp2-890       EPSON Stylus Photo 890
Epson Stylus Photo 895         escp2-895       EPSON Stylus Photo 895
Epson Stylus Photo 900         escp2-ph900     EPSON Stylus Photo 900
Epson Stylus Photo 915         escp2-915       EPSON Stylus Photo 915
Epson Stylus Photo 925         escp2-925       EPSON Stylus Photo 925
Epson Stylus Photo 950         escp2-950       EPSON Stylus Photo 950
Epson Stylus Photo 960         escp2-960       EPSON Stylus Photo 960
Epson Stylus Photo 1200        escp2-1200      EPSON Stylus Photo 1200
Epson Stylus Photo 1270        escp2-1270      EPSON Stylus Photo 1270
Epson Stylus Photo 1280        escp2-1280      EPSON Stylus Photo 1280
Epson Stylus Photo 1290        escp2-1290      EPSON Stylus Photo 1290
Epson Stylus Photo 2000P       escp2-2000      EPSON Stylus Photo 2000P
Epson Stylus Photo 2100        escp2-2100      EPSON Stylus Photo 2100
Epson Stylus Photo 2200        escp2-2200      EPSON Stylus Photo 2200
Epson Stylus Photo EX          escp2-ex        EPSON Stylus Photo EX
Epson Stylus Photo EX3         escp2-ex3       EPSON Stylus Photo EX3
Epson Stylus Pro 5000          escp2-5000      EPSON Stylus Pro 5000
Epson Stylus Pro 5500          escp2-5500      EPSON Stylus Pro 5500
Epson Stylus Pro 7000          escp2-7000      EPSON Stylus Pro 7000
Epson Stylus Pro 7500          escp2-7500      EPSON Stylus Pro 7500
Epson Stylus Pro 7600          escp2-7600      EPSON Stylus Pro 7600
Epson Stylus Pro 9000          escp2-9000      EPSON Stylus Pro 9000
Epson Stylus Pro 9500          escp2-9500      EPSON Stylus Pro 9500
Epson Stylus Pro 9600          escp2-9600      EPSON Stylus Pro 9600
Epson Stylus Pro 10000         escp2-10000     EPSON Stylus Pro 10000
Epson Stylus Color Pro XL      escp2-pro-xl    EPSON Stylus Color Pro XL
Epson Stylus Scan 2000         escp2-scan2000  EPSON Stylus Scan 2000
Epson Stylus Scan 2500         escp2-scan2500  EPSON Stylus Scan 2500
Epson Stylus CX3200            escp2-cx3200    EPSON Stylus CX-3200
Epson Stylus CX5200            escp2-cx5200    EPSON Stylus CX-5200
Epson CL-700                   escp2-cl700     EPSON CL-700
Epson CL-750                   escp2-cl750     EPSON CL-750
Epson CL-760                   escp2-cl760     EPSON CL-760
Epson EM-900C                  escp2-em900c    EPSON EM-900C
Epson EM-930C                  escp2-em930c    EPSON EM-930C
Epson MC-2000                  escp2-mc2000    EPSON MC-2000
Epson MC-5000                  escp2-mc5000    EPSON MC-5000
Epson MC-7000                  escp2-mc7000    EPSON MC-7000
Epson MC-9000                  escp2-mc9000    EPSON MC-9000
Epson MC-10000                 escp2-mc10000   EPSON MC-10000
Epson MJ-930C                  escp2-mj930c    EPSON MJ-930C
Epson MJ-5100C                 escp2-mj5100c   EPSON MJ-5100C
Epson MJ-6000C                 escp2-mj6000c   EPSON MJ-6000C
Epson MJ-8000C                 escp2-mj8000c   EPSON MJ-8000C
Epson PM-700C                  escp2-pm700c    EPSON PM-700C
Epson PM-730C                  escp2-pm730c    EPSON PM-730C
Epson PM-740C                  escp2-pm740c    EPSON PM-740C
Epson PM-750C                  escp2-pm750c    EPSON PM-750C
Epson PM-760C                  escp2-pm760c    EPSON PM-760C
Epson PM-770C                  escp2-pm770c    EPSON PM-770C
Epson PM-780C                  escp2-pm780c    EPSON PM-780C
Epson PM-790PT                 escp2-pm790pt   EPSON PM-790PT
Epson PM-800C                  escp2-pm800c    EPSON PM-800C
Epson PM-850PT                 escp2-pm850pt   EPSON PM-850PT
Epson PM-870C                  escp2-pm870c    EPSON PM-870C
Epson PM-880C                  escp2-pm880c    EPSON PM-880C
Epson PM-930C                  escp2-pm930c    EPSON PM-930C
Epson PM-950C                  escp2-pm950c    EPSON PM-950C
Epson PM-970C                  escp2-pm970c    EPSON PM-970C
Epson PM-2000C                 escp2-pm2000c   EPSON PM-2000C
Epson PM-2200C                 escp2-pm2200c   EPSON PM-2200C
Epson PM-3000C                 escp2-pm3000c   EPSON PM-3000C
Epson PM-3300C                 escp2-pm3300c   EPSON PM-3300C
Epson PM-3500C                 escp2-pm3500c   EPSON PM-3500C
Epson PM-3700C                 escp2-pm3700c   EPSON PM-3700C
Epson PM-4000PX                escp2-pm4000px  EPSON PM-4000PX
Epson PM-5000C                 escp2-pm5000c   EPSON PM-5000C
Epson PM-7000C                 escp2-pm7000c   EPSON PM-7000C
Epson PM-9000C                 escp2-pm9000c   EPSON PM-9000C
Epson PM-10000                 escp2-pm10000   EPSON PM-10000
Epson PX-7000                  escp2-px7000    EPSON PX-7000
Epson PX-9000                  escp2-px9000    EPSON PX-9000
Fujitsu PrintPartner 10V       pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Fujitsu PrintPartner 16DV      pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Fujitsu PrintPartner 20W       pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Fujitsu PrintPartner 8000      pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
HP 2000C                       pcl-2000        HP DeskJet 2000 series
HP 2500C                       pcl-2500        HP DeskJet 2500 series
HP 2500CM                      pcl-2500        HP DeskJet 2500 series
HP Business Inkjet 2200        pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Business Inkjet 2230        pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Business Inkjet 2250        pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Business Inkjet 2250TN      pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Business Inkjet 2280        pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Color Inkjet Printer CP1160 pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Color Inkjet Printer CP1700 pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP Color LaserJet 4550         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP Color LaserJet 5000         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP DesignJet 230               pcl-desnj-230   HP DesignJet 230
HP DesignJet 250C              pcl-desnj-250   HP DesignJet 250
HP DesignJet 430               pcl-desnj-430   HP DesignJet 430
HP DesignJet 450C              pcl-desnj-450   HP DesignJet 450
HP DesignJet 455CA             pcl-desnj-455   HP DesignJet 455
HP DesignJet 488CA             pcl-desnj-488   HP DesignJet 488
HP DesignJet 700               pcl-desnj-700   HP DesignJet 700
HP DesignJet 750C              pcl-750         HP DesignJet 750C
HP DesignJet 750C Plus         pcl-750         HP DesignJet 750C
HP DesignJet 2500CP            pcl-desnj-2500  HP DesignJet 2500
HP DesignJet 3500CP            pcl-desnj-3500  HP DesignJet 3500
HP DesignJet ColorPro CAD      pcl-2500        HP DesignJet ColorPro CAD
HP DeskJet 340C                pcl-340         HP DeskJet 340
HP DeskJet 400                 pcl-400         HP DeskJet 400
HP DeskJet 400C                pcl-540         HP DeskJet 540C
HP DeskJet 420C                pcl-540         HP DeskJet 540C
HP DeskJet 450                 pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 500                 pcl-500         HP DeskJet 500
HP DeskJet 500C                pcl-501         HP DeskJet 500C
HP DeskJet 505J Plus           pcl-500         HP DeskJet 500
HP DeskJet 510                 pcl-500         HP DeskJet 500
HP DeskJet 520                 pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP DeskJet 540C                pcl-540         HP DeskJet 540C
HP DeskJet 550C                pcl-550         HP DeskJet 550C
HP DeskJet 560C                pcl-560         HP DeskJet 560C
HP DeskJet 600                 pcl-600         HP DeskJet 600/600C
HP DeskJet 610C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 610CL               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 612C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 640C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 648C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 660C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 670C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 670TV               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 672C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 680C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 682C                pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP DeskJet 690C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 692C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 693C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 694C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 695C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 697C                pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP DeskJet 810C                pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 812C                pcl-812         HP DeskJet 812C
HP DeskJet 815C                pcl-812         HP DeskJet 812C
HP DeskJet 816C                pcl-812         HP DeskJet 812C
HP DeskJet 825C                pcl-845         HP DeskJet 845C
HP DeskJet 830C                pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 832C                pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 840C                pcl-840         HP DeskJet 840C
HP DeskJet 841C                pcl-840         HP DeskJet 840C
HP DeskJet 842C                pcl-842         HP DeskJet 842C
HP DeskJet 843C                pcl-842         HP DeskJet 842C
HP DeskJet 845C                pcl-845         HP DeskJet 845C
HP DeskJet 850C                pcl-850         HP DeskJet 850C
HP DeskJet 855C                pcl-855         HP DeskJet 855C
HP DeskJet 870C                pcl-870         HP DeskJet 870C
HP DeskJet 880C                pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 882C                pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP DeskJet 890C                pcl-890         HP DeskJet 890C
HP DeskJet 895C                pcl-895         HP DeskJet 895C
HP DeskJet 916C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 920C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 930C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 932C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 933C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 934C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 935C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 940C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 948C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 950C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 952C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 955C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 957C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 959C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 960C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 970C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 975C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 980C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 990C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 995C                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 1100C               pcl-1100        HP DeskJet 1100C
HP DeskJet 1120C               pcl-1120        HP DeskJet 1120C
HP DeskJet 1125C               pcl-1120        HP DeskJet 1120C
HP DeskJet 1200C               pcl-1200        HP DeskJet 1200C
HP DeskJet 1220C               pcl-1220        HP DeskJet 1220C
HP DeskJet 1600C               pcl-1600        HP DeskJet 1600C
HP DeskJet 1600CM              pcl-1600        HP DeskJet 1600C
HP DeskJet 3810                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 3816                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 3820                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 3822                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 5550                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 5551                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 6122                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP DeskJet 6127                pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP E-printer E20               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP LaserJet 2                  pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
HP LaserJet 2D                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
HP LaserJet 2P                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
HP LaserJet 2P Plus            pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
HP LaserJet 3                  pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
HP LaserJet 3D                 pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
HP LaserJet 3P w/ PCL5         pcl-4l          HP LaserJet 4L
HP LaserJet 3P w/PS            pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
HP LaserJet 4                  pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4 Plus             pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4L                 pcl-4l          HP LaserJet 4L
HP LaserJet 4M                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4ML                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4P                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4Si                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 4V                 pcl-4v          HP LaserJet 4V, 4Si
HP LaserJet 5                  pcl-5           HP LaserJet 5 series
HP LaserJet 5L                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 5P                 pcl-5           HP LaserJet 5 series
HP LaserJet 5Si                pcl-5si         HP LaserJet 5Si
HP LaserJet 6                  pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 6L                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 6P                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
HP LaserJet 1100               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 1100A              pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 1150               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 1200               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 1220               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 1300               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 2100               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 2200               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 2300               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 3200               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 3200m              pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 3200se             pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 4000               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 4050               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 4100               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 4200               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 4300               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 5000               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 5100               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 8000               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 8100               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 8150               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP LaserJet 9000               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
HP OfficeJet                   pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP OfficeJet 300               pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP OfficeJet 330               pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP OfficeJet 350               pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP OfficeJet 500               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 520               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 570               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 580               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 590               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 600               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 610               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 625               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 630               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 635               pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
HP OfficeJet 700               pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP OfficeJet 710               pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP OfficeJet 720               pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP OfficeJet 725               pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP OfficeJet 6110              pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet D125              pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet D135              pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet D145              pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet D155              pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet G55               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet G85               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet G95               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet K60               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet K80               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP OfficeJet LX                pcl-520         HP DeskJet 520
HP OfficeJet Pro 1150C         pcl-850         HP DeskJet 850C
HP OfficeJet Pro 1170C         pcl-890         HP DeskJet 890C
HP OfficeJet Pro 1175C         pcl-890         HP DeskJet 890C
HP OfficeJet R40               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet R45               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet R60               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet R65               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet R80               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet T45               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet T65               pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP OfficeJet V40               pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart P1000            pcl-P1000       HP PhotoSmart P1000
HP PhotoSmart P1100            pcl-P1100       HP PhotoSmart P1100
HP PhotoSmart P1115            pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart P1215            pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart P1218            pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart P1315            pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart 7150             pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart 7350             pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PhotoSmart 7550             pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PSC 370                     pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP PSC 380                     pcl-690         HP DeskJet 690 series
HP PSC 500                     pcl-810         HP DeskJet 810C
HP PSC 750                     pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PSC 950                     pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PSC 2110                    pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PSC 2150                    pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
HP PSC 2210                    pcl-900         HP DeskJet 900 series
IBM 4019                       pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
IBM 4029 030 LaserPrinter 10   pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
IBM Infoprint 12               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
IBM Page Printer 3112          pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Infotec 4651 MF                pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Kyocera F-1010                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Kyocera FS-600                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-680                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-1000                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-1000+               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-1010                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-1800                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-1900                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-3500                pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Kyocera FS-3750                pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Kyocera FS-3800                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-9100DN              pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Kyocera FS-9500DN              pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Lexmark 4076                   lexmark-4076    Lexmark 4076
Lexmark Optra E                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Lexmark Optra E+               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Lexmark Valuewriter 300        pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Lexmark Z42                    lexmark-z42     Lexmark Z42
Lexmark Z43                    lexmark-z43     Lexmark Z43
Lexmark Z52                    lexmark-z52     Lexmark Z52
Lexmark Z53                    lexmark-z53     Lexmark Z53
Minolta PagePro 6              pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Minolta PagePro 6e             pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Minolta PagePro 6ex            pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Minolta PagePro 8              pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Minolta PagePro 8L             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Minolta PagePro 1100           pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
NEC SuperScript 660i           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
NEC SuperScript 860            pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
NEC SuperScript 870            pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
NEC SuperScript 1260           pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
NEC SuperScript 1800           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata OL400                  pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL400e                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL400ex                pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL410e                 pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata OL600e                 pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL610e/S               pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL800                  pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Okidata OL810ex                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 6e             pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 6ex            pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 8p             pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 10e            pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 10ex           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Okipage 14ex           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Okidata Super 6e               pcl-4l          HP LaserJet 4L
Olivetti JP350S                pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Olivetti PG 306                pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Olympus P-300E                 olympus-p300    Olympus P-300 series
Olympus P-300U                 olympus-p300    Olympus P-300 series
Olympus P-330NE                olympus-p300    Olympus P-300 series
PCPI 1030                      pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Panasonic KX-P4410             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Panasonic KX-P4450             pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Panasonic KX-P6150             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Panasonic KX-P6500             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Raven LP-410                   pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Ricoh Aficio 220               pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Ricoh Aficio 401               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Ricoh Aficio 700               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Samsung ML-85                  pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Samsung ML-4600                pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Samsung ML-5000a               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Samsung ML-6000/6100           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Samsung ML-7000/7000P/7000N    pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Samsung ML-7050                pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Samsung QL-5100A               pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Samsung QL-6050                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Seiko SpeedJET 200             pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Sharp AR-161                   pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Sony IJP-V100                  pcl-601         HP DeskJet 600 series
Star LS-04                     pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Star LaserPrinter 8            pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Tally MT908                    pcl-3           HP LaserJet III series
Xerox Able 1406                pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Xerox DocuPrint P8e            pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Xerox DocuPrint P12            pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Xerox DocuPrint P1202          pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series
Xerox DocuPrint 4508           pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Xerox DocuPrint N4512          pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Xerox DocuPrint N4512 PS       pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Xerox Document Centre 400      pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Generic PCL 4 Printer          pcl-2           HP LaserJet II series
Generic PCL 5 Printer          pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Generic PCL 5c Printer         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Generic PCL 5e Printer         pcl-4           HP LaserJet 4 series
Generic PCL 6/PCL XL Printer   pcl-6           HP LaserJet 6 series


Printer-Specific Notes:

    * The Epson Stylus C70, C80, and C82 will give better results
      using Three Color Composite printing on Premium Glossy Photo
      Paper and Premium Semigloss.  Epson's proprietary drivers do
      this on these papers.  The black ink is formulated differently
      from the others, and does not adhere properly to these special
      papers.

    * The Epson Stylus C70, C80, and C82 appear to support resolutions
      of 1440x1440 and 2880x1440, but these resolutions may not yield
      any improvement over 2880x720.  Experiments suggest that
      1440x1440 yields slightly better results than 2880x720 on Epson
      Photo Paper, but somewhat inferior results on Premium Glossy
      Photo Paper.  2880x1440 yields essentially no additional
      improvement on Photo Paper, and intermediate results on Premium
      Glossy Photo Paper.

      We expect that 1440x1440 would yield maximum improvement over
      2880x720 on line art with very fine detail.  It is unlikely that
      2880x1440 would yield any significant additional improvement.

      Note that these resolutions are not officially supported by
      Epson on the C70 and C80, and may not work on all C70 and C80
      printers.

    * Many Epson printers (specifically, the Epson Stylus Color 740
      and all newer printers) will not respond to ASCII text without a
      special "activation" sequence (specifically, this command takes
      the printers out of "packet mode").  A brand new printer, or one
      that has been connected to a Windows system, may or may not work
      in packet mode.  Therefore, the common suggestion to test a
      printer port by sending plain text to it may not work for these
      printers; failure to print in this fashion is not a positive
      indication that the printer or the connection is malfunctioning.
      These printers are, however, able to print plain text *after*
      the activation sequence is sent.

      A suggestion would be to use the escputil command to print a
      test pattern:

      escputil -n -u -P printer

      or

      escputil -n -u -r /dev/lp0

      The `-u' option will send the activation sequence.  In addition
      to printing the test pattern (if at least unidirectional
      communication is set up), this will enable printing plain ASCII
      text, at least until the printer is powered off (or used under
      Windows).

      To test bidirectional communication, the command

      escputil -i -u -r /dev/lp0

      is a good choice, as it will print (to the screen) the amount of
      ink in the printer.

      Note that this activation sequence is both unnecessary and
      incorrect on older printers.

      The current list of printers for which the activation sequence
      must be sent is:

      EPSON Stylus C20SX
      EPSON Stylus C20UX
      EPSON Stylus C40SX
      EPSON Stylus C40UX
      EPSON Stylus C41SX
      EPSON Stylus C41UX
      EPSON Stylus C42SX
      EPSON Stylus C42UX
      EPSON Stylus C50
      EPSON Stylus C60
      EPSON Stylus C61
      EPSON Stylus C62
      EPSON Stylus C70
      EPSON Stylus C80
      EPSON Stylus C82
      EPSON Stylus Color 440
      EPSON Stylus Color 460
      EPSON Stylus Color 480
      EPSON Stylus Color 580
      EPSON Stylus Color 640
      EPSON Stylus Color 660
      EPSON Stylus Color 670
      EPSON Stylus Color 680
      EPSON Stylus Color 740
      EPSON Stylus Color 760
      EPSON Stylus Color 777
      EPSON Stylus Color 860
      EPSON Stylus Color 880
      EPSON Stylus Color 83
      EPSON Stylus Color 900
      EPSON Stylus Color 980
      EPSON Stylus Color 1160
      EPSON Stylus Photo EX3
      EPSON Stylus Photo 720
      EPSON Stylus Photo 750
      EPSON Stylus Photo 780/785/790
      EPSON Stylus Photo 810/820
      EPSON Stylus Photo 825/830
      EPSON Stylus Photo 870/875
      EPSON Stylus Photo 890/895
      EPSON Stylus Photo 900
      EPSON Stylus Photo 915
      EPSON Stylus Photo 925
      EPSON Stylus Photo 950
      EPSON Stylus Photo 960
      EPSON Stylus Photo 1200
      EPSON Stylus Photo 1270
      EPSON Stylus Photo 1280/1290
      EPSON Stylus Photo 2000P
      EPSON Stylus Photo 2100
      EPSON Stylus Photo 2200
      EPSON Stylus Scan 2000
      EPSON Stylus Scan 2500
      EPSON Stylus CX-3200
      EPSON Stylus CX-5200
